Refactoring Octopus: Modularity with Calamari and Sashimi (#282)
OctopusDeploy/blog: blog/2020-05/refactor-octopus-modularity/index.md

author: rob.pearson@octopus.com
visibility: private
published: 2020-05-27
metaImage: 
bannerImage: 
tags:
 - Engineering
---

// TODO: Add blog post graphic

In 2012, we shipped Octopus Deploy 1.0, and nearly 8 years later, the product continues to grow in popularity as well as feature set. As a part of this journey, the code base has undergone some big changes, including significant overhauls and rewrites. This post is the first post in a new blog series, where we are sharing some of the problems of this growth and how we're refactoring the Octopus codebase to simplify it and make it easier to change.

In this article, I talk about how we're introducing modularity to make it easier to integrate Octopus with external services and tools.

## Octopus, Tentacle, and Calamari! 

![Octopus and Tentacle diagram](octopus-and-tentacle.png)

It's time to walk down memory lane for a short history lesson. Octopus has long made it easy to ship web sites and services, but the programming logic that powers deployment execution has moved around over the years. 

> In the Octopus 1.x and 2.x timeframe, the deployments execution logic lived in Tentacle. Octopus Server did the primary coordination, and deployments were executed directly within our Tentacle agent running on deployment targets. If we shipped a new version of Octopus or made an update to the deployment execution logic, we had to ship a new version of Tentacle. They were tightly coupled and required to be in sync.

Reviewer: Don't take my word for it, that is the lore as I understood it

Author: Yup, I just checked. 👍

Then in Octopus 3.0, we introduced Calamari, which we called little slices of Octopus. This new component was a standalone deployment execution engine, and we envisioned we'd created multiple independent calamari slices for different purposes and technologies. Tentacle was simplified as it became a simple pipe to communicate with Octopus Server and securely transfer deployment data. Deployment work was delegated to Calamari and which benefited both components. As time passed, Calamari has grown to be a bit of a monolith, and we only had two slices: Standard Calamari and Calamari Cloud.

Tentacle and Calamari in this approach worked very well, and they have helped our customers execute tens of millions of deployments. It has, however, introduced some challenges. If we want to add a new technology integration, it requires the developer to have in-depth knowledge of numerous touchpoints across the Octopus codebase from the front end to the server-side code and Calamari. While this works, it slows us down, and it adds friction to add new features. We knew we needed a change, and we've been planning it for a while. 

## Introducing Calamari flavors

> Our first step was to start splitting up Calamari as we originally intended. Split it into little slices with separate projects and distinct entry points. We still have our core Calamari for standard deployment work like script execution, but we're introducing additional "flavors" like Terraform Calamari, AWS Calamari, Azure Calamari, etc. It's interesting to note that each flavor brings support for specific platforms like Windows, macOS, Linux, and ARM.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our first step was to start splitting up Calamari as we originally intended, into pieces we are calling "flavors". The split is along step categories (e.g. AWS, Terraform, K8, etc). Each of these is a separate executable, which allows us to vary the platforms we target for each flavor (e.g. Windows, macOS, Linux, and ARM) as well as the runtime (e.g. .NET Core 3.1). This clean separation will allow us to more quickly iterate on a particular technology without needing to bring all the rest along for the ride.
```

Calamari flavors bring several advantages:
* Each slice is independent and can be upgraded independently and customized as per the project's needs.
* Allows us to separate older technologies like Azure Cloud Services and keep them separate and stable while we focus on other priorities. 

## Introducing Sashimi

> With Calamari flavors conceptualized, this leads us to our next major refactoring or new concept. Introducing Sashimi, which we are calling little slices of Octopus Server. Whereas Calamari flavors are little slices of our deployment execution engine, Sashimi is little slices of Octopus Server. We are taking a knife to Octopus and carving out the technology-specific things. This change enables us to split out the web UI and server-side logic into separate self-contained components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the rethink of Calamari, we have moved onto slicing up the Server into pieces we are calling Sashimi. Similar to Calamari, these slices will fall along deployment step technology lines. The slices will eventually contain the UI and server side parts of the step, deployment target and accounts. 
```

This is a huge step forward as this allows us to make the Octopus Server (both front-end and web services) a world-class coordination engine without any specific knowledge or hooks for technology-specific steps. For example, we can have support for Azure, AWS, or Terraform without the server having any specific knowledge or references of these technologies.

Our goal for this work is to simplify the development to add support for new technologies and services. In other words, developers on our team can write code to add support in isolation from Octopus, grok it, and test it in isolation. This update removes the mental weight of understanding all the touchpoints within Octopus Server. The outcome is faster integration with fewer headaches. i.e., We could introduce Pulumi support following the patterns created by Terraform in a very short period. It also opens up the possibility for third parties to add support for their technologies within Octopus with very little overhead.

### Sashimi components and one big problem

> Each Sashimi slices is contained within a [NuGet package](https://nuget.org), and it contains: 

Reviewer: The packages are not going to NuGet, but to our (public) feedz.io repository

Author: I'm going to remove the reference to nuget.

- Zipped UI files that we inject into the main user interface.
- Server-side processing components.
- Any third party libraries or components (dependencies).
- Standalone calamari executables for each platform. 

> This approach introduced an interesting problem that we didn't expect. Each Sashimi slice bundle's numerous files, and this can add up to a lot of storage. For example, if we had 10 Calamari flavors for 3 platforms each, this produces 30 calamari components at 40 MB each. The result of this is that we were facing 1.2 GB of additional data per Octopus release. This approach wasn't ideal. 

Reviewer: We totally expected it, that's why we didn't do it earlier
```suggestion
This approach introduced an interesting problem that held us back previously. Since each of the Calamari executables contain the full .NET Core runtime, the size of the Octopus Server installer would increase significantly. For example, if we had 10 Calamari flavors for 3 platforms each, this produces 30 calamari components at 40 MB each compressed. That's an additional 1.2 GB added to the installer download. This approach wasn't ideal. 
```

Author: Great update. This is far clearer!

### Sashimi and calamari consolidation

> To solve this file size problem, we needed to come up with a thoughtful solution. Our solution is to use a build-time process to consolidate the Calamari components and extract all common files and executables into a separate ZIP file, which we can compress further. The common component is only 150 MB, and the rest of the files are negligible. We also build an index at build-time, which we use at runtime so we can reconstitute the appropriate components within Octopus Server. Octopus then transfers the required Calamari flavor to the deployment target.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve this problem, we took a page out of the [Windows Imaging Format](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Windows_Imaging_Format) file format and used the [Singe-instance storage](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-instance_storage) technique. At build time we look at all the Calamari packages and hash each individual file. We then only store the unique files in the resulting archive, which is only about 150MB in size, regardless of how may flavors of Calamari there are. At runtime we use the included index file to reconstitute the original Calamari executable archives.
```

Author: Same. Great update. This is far clearer.
